[Music] Good day I'm Norman Wildberger today we're
going to start moving towards understanding higher
data structures where we take our four basic kinds
of data structures lists order sets multi sets and
sets and start combining them to create larger
more complicated objects so these four basic data
structures generally so far have been built from
natural numbers so the elements so far are all
natural numbers for example we have things like
this list it's a list from five with six elements
all the entries or elements are natural numbers in
the range 1 to 5 here is an ordered set or o set
o for one two we can tell it's ordered because
there are commas and it's a old set because of
the braces it could be an O set from five but it
certainly has three elements here's a multi- set
or M set from five with four elements you can
see there's four elements there's repetitions
there so it's an M set and the square brackets
means that repetitions are allowed the order
doesn't matter over here is a set s = 534 notice
that there's no commas that's our convention for
a set so this is a three set from five or belongs
to set 53 the elements are in the range 1 to five
and there are three of them in today's video we
want to start talking about more complicated data
structures by combining our four basic types in a
kind of a hierarchical or nested way so here's a
sort of initial orientation with some examples
of the kinds of data structures that we might
might be interested in so the first one here have
a look at what this is we have square brackets and
commas telling us that this is a list but now
the elements of the list are themselves data
structures in fact this thing is a list it's a
two list actually and here's another two list
and here's another two list and here's another
two list so this is a list whose elements are in
fact two lists it's a list of lists B here what do
we have here well we have the braces and we have
commas that's telling us this is an ordered set or
an O set and if we look at the elements of this o
set we see that they're all M sets or multi sets
because they're square brackets with no commas
that's a 3M set there's another 3M set there's
another 3M set they all happen to be three M sets
from five because the elements go up to five so
this is an ordered set whose elements are M sets
here we have square brackets and no commas that's
telling us that's an M set or multi set and the
entries or the elements are ordered sets in fact
two o sets and we see that in fact there is a bit
of repetition so 1 comma three occurs several
times so this really is a situation where the
elements are repeated the fact there's no commas
means that we could permute these elements and the
object wouldn't change and finally D here it's
a little bit even more complicated because now
we have braces with no commas that's telling us
it's a set and what are the elements of this set
well this thing here is also a set it's a two
set and here is a three set and here's a four
set so this is a little bit more complicated than
these first three because here the elements are
of different kinds in each of these examples the
elements were all of the same kind here we all
have uh two o sets and here we all have three
M sets so on but it's possible that we might be
interested in data structures whose elements are
of actually different kinds these are examples of
the more sophisticated or higher types of data
structures that naturally we might be led to in
a lot of different situations in mathematics so
once we are on this path well more possibilities
open up that last example that we looked at
well we can consider other things that are in
the same direction and go further have a look at
the this thing here for example this e what kind
of an object is it it's got braces and commas
means it's an O set and the elements of this o
set well here is a two list here is a two o set
here is a 2 m set and here is a two set so this
oet has contained inside it examples of all four
different types of data structures here F square
brackets with no commas that's an M set and this m
set consists of Other M sets and in fact all the M
sets here happen to have the properties that their
elements are all just ones certain number of ones
this is uh sort of something simple about it but
there's still some interesting complexity involved
here what do we have okay now it's even a
little bit more complicated we have braces
and no commas that's a set okay and what are
the elements of this set G well it has two
elements there's this object and there's
this object we can tell that the way the
brackets are organized so here this object is
what well it's got brackets with a comma that
means it's a list so it's a list whose elements
are themselves sets or possibly M sets because
when there's just one element in a set it's
not so easy for us to tell whether it's a m
set or a set our notation doesn't distinguish
between M sets and sets when there's just one
element or in fact when there's zero elements
that happens over here as well over here we
have a ordered set whose elements are
either lists or M sets depending on the
interpretation how about H well we have square
brackets around the outside and then there's
an object and a comma there's another object so
there's two objects we have to sort of keep the
braces organized so this brace and that brace
goes together there's an object here and an
object here an object here all right so this is
alog together an list and the first element in
this list is a ordered set and the elements of
that ordered set happen to be two lists now the
second element here is a another list it's got
square brackets and commas and the first element
is a two list the second element is a three list
and the third element is either the empty set or
the empty o set okay so lots of questions arise
first of all how do we assign types to this story
there's now going to be a profusion of different
types are we going to have a systematic way of
sort of separating this type of object from this
type of object Etc how do we distinguish objects
by that I mean there's a possibility of ambiguity
here occasionally because this thing here could
represent a set or an M set and so there's just
a little bit of um possible ambiguity maybe we
need to augment our notation to separate uh sets
and M sets in these sort of special cases and of
course a very daunting kind of problem how do we
count these kinds of things once we've established
a certain kind of type of object like this then
it might be rather challenging to count how many
of them there are but it might still be pretty
interesting this General line of inquiry probably
has historical parallels with some interesting
situations long ago in ancient empires there
would have been accountants or treasurers that
would have kept track of the Empire and what its
assets are and the job of trying to figure out
how to organize the various assets of a large
region Empire country whatever um has a lot of
similarities with what we're doing here because
there's sort of different ways of thinking about
things there's different kinds of objects there's
containments of certain things contained naturally
within other things for example we might want to
be keeping track of land there might be various
sizes or organizational structures of land
different kinds of money ships towns people
jewelry there might be these inventories and
there might be sort of overlap and we just want
to organize what actually is in the region so
that would be a very important thing for the king
to be able to do is to call his chief accountant
or Treasurer and get a sense of how much do we
have right now how much of this how much of that
where are things Etc a somewhat more recent kind
of version of the same kind of thinking is with
the manufacturing of containers containers in
a rather General sense so furniture or anything
that allows one to organize things boxes filing
cabinets folders books or maybe more recently
containers so there are ways of organizing things
using these compartment compartments and objects
and there's certainly the possibility of putting
some of these inside others and sort of organizing
things hierarchically with nested things inside
each other it's kind of a physical analog of what
we're talking about mathematically and even more
up to date the challenges of organizing computer
operating systems so on your computer well you may
have several computers and you may have many hard
drives and these hard drives might be partitioned
and there's folders and inside the folders there
are other folders and inside those folders
there are files and inside those files there
are other files and so you probably know that
you know from experience once you have enough
stuff going on your computer it can be rather
challenging to keep everything organized and
the the structural thinking about how to organize
this kind of thing is very important to as aspect
of U computer architecture these days so these
are all sort of somewhat practical applications
or practical analogues of what we're thinking
about here sort of more in a pure mathematical
sense here with these data structures within
mathematics what we're talking about falls under
the realm of combinatorics this a very vibrant and
interesting area of mathematics these days and we
might Define combinatorics as the science and art
of organization to me that's pretty close to the
heart of how I see it cenator is often associated
with counting and counting does play a very big
role in combinatorics but maybe it's not actually
the the key part of commentor I'd like to think of
counting as something that naturally comes along
long and is an aspect of organization so this
setup of notation and definitions for higher data
structures that we are sort of moving towards is
actually a core aspect of orienting combinatorics
so what we're really doing is providing a language
and a structure sort of a framework for thinking
about quite a few questions in combinatorics
and we'll see related disciplines as well so
this is a very big task which we should tackle
rather modestly and carefully so we shouldn't
be too quick to try do it all at once right our
approach to things is to build things up
carefully carefully slowly slowly step by
step starting with the essentials the basics
the simplest ingredients and then proceeding
methodically carefully building up one step at
a time making sure that everybody knows how to
go from one step to the next all right this is
a very concrete down to earth feet on the ground
approach to mathematics that's what we're going
pursue here with this approach to combinatorics
so a good place to start is with lists because
that's our first type of data structure and so
we'll talk about lists of lists okay so let's
remind ourselves that list n k that refers to
a klist from n something that we're hopefully
very familiar with by now so for example list
52 refers to objects of the following type the
list 1 one list 1 two the list 33 the list 51
list 42 things like that two lists from five
okay so now we are going to define a new kind
of data structure one that we haven't considered
officially before so for J equals 012 Etc we are
going to Define this new type of data structure
it's list and then brackets list n k comma J so
have a look at the structure of the type it's
a little bit complicated because it has a list
inside a list but the large scale structure is
that we have a list with then two ingredients
a first and a second and this mimics what's going
on here so up here when we had list NK the N was
referred to the range of values that the objects
or elements of the list could be taken from and
the second one the K referred to how many of them
there were going to be at the end so exactly the
same thing is happening here the list NK here
which appears in the first part of this pair
is telling us what kinds of objects we're going to
be allowing as elements of this new data structure
and the J here playing the same Ro is the okay is
telling us how many of these objects we're going
to allow so what does something like this look
like well it looks like a list so it has square
brackets and commas so there will be a first one
let's call it L1 and then a second one L2 all the
way up to a J One LJ because we're saying that
there are going to be J of these objects now what
about each one of these individually well each
of the Lis is itself a list a klist from n we're
very familiar with that right we know what a klist
from n looks like so each one of these is a klist
from n as I runs from one to J other words just
all of these have to be K lists from n and that's
our new type of object which which is type list
of list n KJ we could say it's a j list from list
NK let's look at an example how about list of
list 52 comma 3 so this is a three list from list
52 list 52 are the kinds of objects we haded up
here okay so these are the kinds of objects which
are going to be the elements of these kinds
of lists so here are two examples the first
one is a there it is right there it's a list with
three elements and you can see that each of these
elements is itself a list it's a list 52 namely
it's a two list from five there's a two list from
five there's another two list from five there's
another two list from five and all together there
are three of them here's another example B it's
got square brackets and commas so it's a list the
first element is the list 3 comma 3 the second
element is the list 3 comma 3 the third element
is the list 1 comma 5 notice that there's some
repetition that's okay when we're talking about
lists repetition is allowed so these are both
examples of lists of this kind so they have
this as their type and let's also remark that
we will agree that the size of these two lists
is what you would probably think it is it's three
because there are three elements to each of these
lists so now we have a new type of data structure
a list of lists so let's do the same kind of thing
by creating a new type called oets of oets so
I remind you that o Set n k we're talking about
k o sets from n these are ordered sets so for
example o set 53 consists of things like this
they're ordered sets so they have braces and
commas and there's three elements and all the
elements have to be in the range 1 2 3 4 5 so
5 41 1 2 4 3 4 1 these are all ordered sets or
all sets size three from five okay so now we're
going to put oets together with osets we're going
to take o sets of oets so we're going to Define
this new type of object so for J equal either 0
1 2 Etc we're going to consider the type O set
of O set and K comma J so this is a j o set from
oset n k it looks something like this okay so
it looks like an oet it's got braces and commas
that's an ordered set there are J elements
o1 O2 up to OJ that's the J there telling us
how many elements there are and each one of the
individual elements is an O set of the kind n k
it's a k set from n so for each of the I's going
from one to J but now in addition furthermore we
require that all the ois be distinct that's what
makes this an O set rather than just a list we are
not allowed to have any repetitions here these
o sets all have to be different so for example
o set of O set 5 32 we're talking about two oets
from oet 53 so oet 53 those are oets that look
like this so these kinds of things are going to
be the elements of this kind of oet so here's an
oet C of this kind it's got braces and a comma
telling us it's an oet and the actual elements
are oets of this kind there are three oets from
five there's a three set from five there's another
three set from five and let's just check these
are indeed distinct they have to be distinct in
order for this to be an oet and we'll agree that
the number of elements or the size of this oet is
two the same number that appears there so we have
o sets of oets now of course we can keep going and
there's no real need for us to just consider sets
of sets or multi sets of multi sets we could also
consider mixed types for example sets of M sets
let's think about that so M set NK refers to a
km set from n for example M set 52 or 2 m set from
five consists of things like this there's an M set
square brackets no commas repetitions are allowed
1 one that's an M set from five here's another M
set from five of size two there's another one
there's another one and so on so these are all
M sets of the type 52 and now let's consider
set of M Set n k comma J so this is a set of M
sets what's it look like looks something like this
it's a set because we see there are braces and no
commas and the objects are M1 M2 up to MJ so
there are J objects and what are these objects
what kinds of things are they well they have
to be M sets of the kind NK in other words k
m sets from n so that means each one of these is
an M Set n k for I = 1 through to J but moreover
because this is a set they all have to be distinct
the Mis are all distinct so we have J distinct or
different M sets inside this set so for example
set of M set 52 2 4 here is M set 52 those are
the kinds of things we're considering so these
are the kinds of objects that are going to be
the elements of this set and now we're talking
about sets with four elements so here's a set
with four elements you see there's no commas so
that's really is a set and here is an M set from
five with two elements and here's another
one here's another one and here's another
one and notice they're all distinct okay they
have to be distinct in order for this to be a
set and we'll agree that the size of this set is
four notice how important and useful it
is that we have a notation for our loms
which at least most of the time clearly
distinguishes the type so that we can
look at something like this and without any
additional information we can deduce that
this is a set not an M set or an O set or a
list because we see the braces and the lack
of commas all right so it's very important
that we have a notational system that does
this for us that allows us to separate these
different types efficiently so we just look at
them okay so this is great so obviously we can do
this in four times four ways right because we have
four different types of data structures so we can
take sets of sets sets of M sets sets of lists Etc
so there's four * 4 16 possible new types of data
structures that we can build exactly along the
lines of these three examples that I've shown you
already right and that's going to be completely um
straightforward for you to to understand now not
all of these 16 types are going to be equally as
important or useful to us right so we don't have
to go off now and build 6 new theories but we are
going to be thinking about which of these are
likely to be useful for us which of them occur
perhaps in other disciplines in fact in our next
video we're going to look at probably the most
useful one which are the lists of lists okay so
lists of lists have an alternate Incarnation as
arrays or in the 2x two case matrices so there's
a natural connection here with well lots of other
things involving rectangular arrays or matrices
so we're going to be looking at arrays as lists
of lists in our next video I hope you'll join me
for that I'm Norman wildberger thanks for [Music]
listening